Welcome to the fourth lecture of the course. Today's lecture will be dedicated on discussion related to pipeline hazards. From the last lecture, we have seen what is the MIPS 5-stage pipeline and we have seen what are the functionalities that are being done on each of these 5 stages. We will have a quick recap on these 5 stages and see what are the scenarios in which the ideal pipeline will not work and these are called hazards and then we will try to address how these hazards are being resolved. So this is the 5-stage risk data path that we have seen consisting of instruction fetch, instruction decode, execute, memory access, and write back. And we will see what are the functionalities that are associated with this as far as instruction fetch is concerned. We will be working on the program counter value and based on PC, we are going to memory and then fetching the addressed word. In the decode we try to understand the operands and opcodes and if there are any register source operands then the contents of these registers are also been brought and kept in the pipeline register. And when it comes to execution or effective address cycle, if it is an arithmetic operation the actual execution takes place. If it is a load or a store operation, effective address calculation takes place. And the fourth stage of MEM is used only for loads and stores wherein based upon the effective address that is calculated in the EX stage the memory is accessed. And the last stage is for writing the results into the registers. And this is what we have seen every cycle we are going to start a new instruction even though the previous instruction is not fully over and after the initial latency for every cycle we can see that one-one instruction is getting completed. And if you look at any point, you can see that all the 5 stages of the pipeline are busy with 5 different instruction and this is the ideal case of visualizing a pipeline. Now, let us try to understand when this pipeline is not going to work. So far what we have seen is the only ideal case, but we would not get such ideal cases always. So let us now practically move into the kind of hazards that we face, the kind of bottlenecks that we face in implementing the pipeline. So hazards are circumstances that could cause an incorrect execution if the next instruction is fetched and executed. So hazards are actually circumstances. In certain scenarios, if you bring the next instruction in the very next clock cycle and trying to execute it, it can lead to an incorrect execution. So this we how to address. And basically there are three different types of hazards. The first one is called structure hazard. The second one is called data hazard. And the third one is called control hazard. Structural hazard means when different instructions at different stages in the pipeline want to use the same hardware resource. So if you have two instruction I1 and I2, both are going to start the execution at different stage. But at one particular point, both these instruction want the same resource.That is shown as a structural hazard. And in data hazard an instruction in the pipeline which is already in the pipeline requires data to be computed by a previous instruction still in the pipeline. So when you have two instruction I1 and I2, let us say the second instruction I2 wants a data which can be produced by I1, but I1 is also not yet complete, I1 is still in the pipeline. This basically happens due to data dependency. And the third one is control hazard. Succeeding instruction to put into the pipeline depends on the outcome of previous branch instruction already in the pipeline. We know that in every cycle, new instruction needs to be brought into the pipeline by the instruction fetch stage. So the new instruction to be brought into the pipeline actually depends on the outcome of a previous branch instruction that is already in the pipeline. Here also we can have two scenarios, let us say I1 and I2. I will bring I2 if the branch in I1 comes out with one particular outcome. I am not supposed to bring I2 if the outcome of the branch in I1 is a different scenario. So whatever instruction that I am going to put into the pipeline, it depends on the outcome of a previous branch which is not yet completed in execution. So this scenario is known as control hazard. So these scenarios, whenever we have a structural hazard or whenever we have a data hazard or if there is a control hazard, if you are trying to bring the next instruction in the pipeline and if you are going to execute that, then that will lead to an incorrect execution. So that is not what we want. Ideally, a pipeline should have additional support facilities to detect whether there is a hazard or not. There should be a hazard detection circuit. The duty of the circuit is to find out whether bringing up the next instruction will cause an incorrect execution. If so what is the kind of hazard and what are the various steps that the control unit has to do in order to make sure that an incorrect execution like a hazard is not occurring? Let us know try to understand more deeper about each of these hazard. The first one is known as a structural hazard. Let us take the consider of a uniport memory. So what do you mean by uniport memory? You have a memory which has only one read port. At any given point of time only one word can be read from the memory. So consider the case that we have a load instruction. When we know that, in the case of an load instruction after the fetching and decoding is over, the address is computed in the ALU. Now you have the address here. Based on the address you are going to access the data memory and the word is accessed from data memory at the end of cycle 4 and you are going to write the result into the register. Consider the case that the second instruction is going to start when the load is in the decode stage. So this is how second instruction proceeds. Let us say there is a third instruction that happens. There is no problem with respect to the first and second instruction as far as this load is concerned, but the problem happens in the fourth instruction. The fourth instruction is also trying to access memory in the instruction fetch state. So you give an address from the program counter and based upon that we how to fetch a word an instruction word from memory. So if you look at cycle number 4 the first load instruction is also trying to access the memory and the instruction I3 which happens fourth in the sequence, they are also trying to perform a reading operation from memory. So you have a load operation from memory and you have an instruction read operation from memory. Both exactly happens at cycle number 4. Now what is hazard here? Attempting to use the same hardware. Attempting to use the same memory by two instruction in different stages of the pipeline exactly at the same time. Since I have only one ported memory, it is not possible to supply two words. One for the load instruction and second one for instruction 3, which can solve this issue. This scenario is known as a structural hazard. So it is impossible. What are the solution to structural hazard. So the scenario is called structural hazard if one read port in the memory. To resolve a structural hazard we how to eliminate the use of the same hardware for two different things exactly at the same time. So what are the solutions? The first solution is simple approach, wait. We must detect a scenario wherein two instructions are trying to access the same hardware. So detecting a hazard is occurring or not and then you should have a mechanism to stall one of the instruction. So when you have two instructions that are going to access the same memory location or that are going to access the memory at the same time, then there should be a provision to detect such a kind of a scenario. Once we detect that it is going to be a structural hazard, we should try to delay one of the instruction in performing the operation. So detecting a hazard followed by a mechanism to stall. The second approach is we should have a solution to duplicate the hardware. So have more number of units wherein this operation can be performed. Duplicate the hardware means multiple such unit will help both the instruction to make a progress. Let us try to see how the structural hazard we have discussed before in the context of a uniport memory should be resolved. So the same load instruction. We know that if the third instruction is going to run that is going to create a problem. So the mechanism is we detected there is going to be hazard and then a bubble, a no operation is been added. Bubbles are nothing but in the cycle number 4, no new instruction is been fixed. So naturally in cycle number 5, no instruction is decoded and subsequently no instruction is executed, memory access and write back. So there is one bubble that goes into it and then only your instruction 3 comes. So essentially what happens is your instruction 3 got shifted by one position. This is the process of detecting a structural hazard and adding a new bubble or a stall in destruction sequence such that two instruction looking for the same hardware are not trying to access them at the same time. Now it will be interesting to note that you may get a doubt. What if this memory access that is happening for instruction 1 is going to have a conflict with the already shifted instruction fetch of instruction 3? You may wonder whether this will create a hazard or not. This also will create a hazard if your instruction 1 is load or not. If instruction 1 is also a load operation, then its MEM stage is used for bringing an instruction word in memory. And we know that every instruction other than load and store the MEM stage is not used at all. If it is a normal ALU operation, then the MEM stage is not used. And we have seen that even though the MEM stage is not used, it is not going to create any problem as far as the ADD instruction is concerned. Still the ADD instruction will take the normal 5 cycles. Since the MEM stage is not used for an arithmetic operation, this will not create an issue as far as a structural hazard is concerned. Another way, so the first approach that we have seen, the first approach that we have seen here is you try to detect the hazard and include a no operation or a bubble or a stall in the subsequent instruction, wherein simultaneous access of the same uniported memory is eliminated. But that can create delay in instructions. Another approach is like what we have already mentioned, we should duplicate the hardware. So what was the memory contention problem? We are having one memory with one read port, either increase the number of read ports in memory such that one read port can be used always by the instruction fetch unit and the other read port can be always used by the data access unit in the pipeline. Another way of trying to looking at it have separate memory, one for exclusively for storing instruction and other one exclusively for storing the data. So the instruction cache only will be accessed during the instruction fetch and data cache will be accessed only during the data access time. So eliminating the structural hazard, we can make use of two separate caches, this is what is known as I-cache and here we are having the D-cache. So I-cache and D-cache can be used parallely. So all modern microprocessors have separate I and D cache, the basic purpose is to eliminate structural hazard that is happening. Now let us try to see data hazards. Consider the instruction sequence that is given in the slide and all the instructions are of the format opcode, destination, operand 1, and operand 2. All of them are arithmetic or logic unit operations. So consider your ADD operations, so r2 and r3 has to be added into r1. And then the very next one is r1 and r3 has to be added into r4; r1 and r7 has to be and operated or you are going to perform a logical and operation to r 6. Again an r1 and r9 logical and result has to go to r8 and then you have an xor operation on r1 and r11 to store the result in r10. So the peculiarities across all these instructions, you can see that the result of the first instruction that is add r1, r2, r3 the result which is stored already in r1 is used by all others in these subsequent instructions. Then what is the problem in this? We know that the result of r1 will be available only at the write-back stage. We are going to write the result only into write-back. Whereas, the subtraction instruction and the or instruction needs the value of r1 in their respective ID stages. So it is at this point, you want the value of r1 for subtraction. So the value that will be available only at the write-back stage is actually read prior to writing it. Similarly, for the and operation also the value of r1 is needed here. For the or operation value of r1 is needed here. But when you take the xor operation, by this time already the value of r1 is written. So that the value of r 1 that is read by the xor instruction the fifth instruction will be correct. Whereas, all other previous instructions are going to read an older value of r1. So if you read the older value of r1 and continue with the execution, it can lead to Incorrect result. So any circumstance that will lead to an incorrect execution of an instruction if these instructions are fetched, decoded and executed in its assigned time order, these three instructions, it will create a hazard. So this is what is known as a data hazard. So there are three generic data hazards that we are going to study today. The first and most common data hazard is known as read after write hazard. It is also known as RAW hazard. So instruction J tries to read an operand before instruction I writes on it. Consider these two instruction given in the slide. Instruction I perform add r1, r2, and r3. Instruction J perform sub r4, r1, and r3. And we know that there is a dependency that exist. The result of I instruction, Ith is needed for the Jth instruction as one of its source operand. This is known as data dependence. The data that instruction J want is dependent on the data that is produced by instruction I. This hazard happens because of the fact that we need an actual communication from instruction I to instruction J because the result of that is produced by instruction I used to be used by instruction J. Now the second category of hazard is known as write after read hazard also known as WAR hazard. Look into the scenario instruction I is going to read from r1 and instruction J is going to write into r1 and instruction K will actually read that value of r1 which is written by J. So essentially, J is supposed to write a value into r1, which the K is going to use. Having said this scenario, if instruction J writes its value into r1 before instruction I reads it. In the normal scenario, we feel that as per the program order I happens first followed by J and then K. So under ideal case, it will not create a problem. But think of a scenario if instruction I cannot read the value of r1. And the processor is permitting instruction J to go ahead with its work and complete it. Assume that I reads the value of r1 after J writes on it. Then it lead to an incorrect execution. Actually, instruction I is supposed to read that value of r1 prior to the updation of r1 by J. So this scenario is known as anti-dependence by the compiler writers. This result from the reuse of the name r1. So during the time of translation of your high level language instruction to machine level language, then the compiler has to choose the appropriate register names for carrying out the execution. Now how can compiler get impacted? In this scenario the compiler is using the register name r1. When the compiler is using the register name r1 that same register r1 will be used by the subsequent instruction which is dependent on it. Assume the case that if compiler has used the register name r8 for J and the same r8 is used by K, then whatever time your instruction I complete, it is never going to affect J or K or whatever time J is going to complete, it is never going to affect I. It is because of the reuse of the variable r1 or the register r1. Had compiler used a different name, this problem itself would not have exist. But in the previous case we have seen in the case of a RAW hazard, it is not the name of the register that is a problem. There exist a dependency between the second instruction with the first instruction. So whatever name that you use, the first instructions result is needed. In this case there is not, this is not a case of transferring of result. It is a case of a name of a register that is a problem. So this is known as anti-dependence scenario that we have seen. Generally this kind of a scenario will not happen in a MIPS 5-stage pipeline, because all instruction take 5 stages. All the read happen in stage number 2 and all the write happen in stage number 5 and all instructions are executed in the order. But down the course, after few couple of lectures, we see that all instructions are not taking 5, some instructions will be taking longer number of cycles and due to certain dependency issues, we are not having strictly in-order execution. Some of the instructions may get executed out of order. So when we have such kind of scenario when you have longer pipelines, which takes more than 5 cycles and when we have out of order execution, then this condition whenever there are instructions which have WAR pattern, they are going to create issue. The third type of hazard is known as write after write hazard where instruction J writes to an operand before instruction I writes to it. So consider the case you have three instruction I, J, and K. I is going to write to r1. J is going to write to r1. And then K is going to read that value of r1 which was written by J. That is a logical order in the program. Now think of a scenario where instruction I is going to write into r1 after instruction J is going to write into r1. So both I and J are writing into r1 and we expect that I completes followed by J. If there is a violation in the order in which the instructions are written, then whatever value K is reading that is wrong. So K is going to read the wrong value of r1. K is supposed to get the value of r1 from J, not from I. This is known as output dependence. This is also happening because of the reuse of the name r1. Had J used r 10 and the same r10 has been used by K also then whatever time I completes, it is no longer going to affect your J and K. This also happens because compiler is using the name r1. This also can happen in MIPS 5- stage pipeline because all instruction take 5, all the write happen at 5 and all instructions are executed in order. But, the last two hazards that is WAR hazard and WAW hazard will happen in out of order pipelines. So far we are considering in order pipelines and all instructions we assume that they will take only 5 stages. As far as this assumption remains true, the WAR hazard and WAW hazard will not happen. Only the RAW hazard we need to take care of. For the time being while dealing with hazards we will try to address the RAW hazards, but later, once we learn longer pipelines and out of order execution, we will come back and revisit the concept of WAR and WAW hazards. Now how to handle a data hazard? We know that data hazard is a scenario where an instruction needs data from the result of a previous instruction still executing in the pipeline. So the solution that is proposed is data forwarding. So consider the case we have ADD R1, R2, R3 three instructions and we know that the execution of instruction R2 + R3 will be completed after the EX stage. Now consider you have one more instruction sub R4, R1, R5. So clearly we know there is a data dependency. The destination register of ADD instruction is same as the source register of the subtraction instruction. Now it is not the content of R1 that is important to us. We know that the second instruction sub is going to start fetching when the first instruction is in the decode stage. Now do you really want R1? If you carefully look into, it is not R1 that is of interest to the subtraction instruction, it is R2 + R3 which is going to be written into R1. So if you carefully look into the ADD instruction it performs R2 + R3 and the result is to be written to R1. It is that result which the subtraction instruction wants. So even though we are not getting the value of R1, but if you could get the result of R2 + R3 and if that result can be forwarded to the subtraction instruction, then we can actually address this data hazard scenario. And how is it possible or is it possible? It is possible if from the point the result is obtained to the point where the result is needed, if we can forward it from the output of the execution unit which will produce R2 + R3 to the input of execution unit which wants this R2 + R3 for subsequent computations, then that can actually solve the problem. So the problem will be solved by having a forwarding mechanism from the execution unit. This technique of forwarding the operand as and when it is available into those execution units which further want them later in the execution is known as operand forwarding or